Well, during Religious Emphasis Week, a speaker or speakers, ministers, were brought to the campus.
Ordinarily there was one minister and a different one each year.
And he would give a certain number of lectures or talks.
during the week, as I recall, every day, you know, two or three hours.
And I recall one very vividly because mother and dad both came up to me, and I was sitting, and handed me a letter, and it was my acceptance for Baylor Medical School.
which was a very spiritual event.
Reckon the Lord was at work that day.
That's right.
Was there ever any... The talks were excellent, and they were such that it would appeal to a broad spectrum of Christians, and not just for one segment or something else.
Do you remember ever anyone objecting to religious emphasis week at a public university?
No, I don't recall any individual or group complaint.
And it was held in Guyon Hall?
Guyon Hall.
Let's see, movies, other lectures.
Graduations.
Let's see, and the basketball arena then was DeWare.
Yes.
Gee, Riley wasn't better.
That's correct.
And did you students go to just about every basketball game and football game?
Many students did.
I went to most of the football games.
Bill Eccles and I sat with the Corps the first game as freshmen, and fortunately Hank Fullberg's younger brother, Hank Fullberg was later football coach,
His younger brother was a sophomore in death battery.
We sat with our unit.
And usually the freshmen had the sophomores behind them, which meant that they were constantly encouraged or more than constantly encouraged to make a yell.
Well, anyway, Hank Fullberg's brother was a good football player.
And he wanted to watch the football game and luckily he sat behind me at the game.
Anyway, Bill and I decided that there were better ways to watch a football game than be a freshman.
And so we got a job taking tickets at the gate.
Oh, and then once you finished taking tickets.
Yeah.
The gates were just open and no one was checking people.
So then he and I would sort of meander down toward the very southwest part of the stadium.
The Corps sat on the east side in the middle part.
And we would go down to the southwest corner and sit with the guys who were the ground keepers and stuff like that down there.
Because in those years, the A&M football games would have about 30,000 people.
And so there was always a lot of vacant space.
Now, did you have on your Corps uniform?
I can't remember.
And you give me the impression that no one ever gave you a hard time for that?
No.
Oh, okay.
Midnight yell practice, was it held in that era?
Yes, before the games.
And we had yell practice every week.
Usually it was just after we'd had our evening supper.
And, of course, we'd have to run over there, you know, not be last.
We were always, the freshmen were always on the first two or three rows.
And it was at Goodwin Hall on the north steps that the yellow leaders stood on the top of them.
And then we would be, the freshmen would be on the first three or four or five rows, six rows.
And we'd be sure, you know, and there'd be a sort of an umbrella of upperclassmen in the background and sides and so forth.
And actually Yale practice was okay.
Summarize, if you can, the impact the World War II veterans made on the campus.
Well, they, of course, were more mature.
Not most, but probably half of them were married.
And they lived in some housing, apartment housing.
It was old army barracks converted, primarily north of University Drive, across from the expanse where the soccer games and the bonfire are held.
And then, of course, they lived all over both communities in apartments and houses.
A certain number of the dormitories were set aside for single veterans.
And the cadet corps occupied the dorm 1 through 12 area, but the other dorms were set aside for single veterans.
The veterans, as a group, were obviously more mature and had had, you know, one to four years of military duty, and many of them came back as very dedicated students.
And, which I might add was a difficult group to compete with for those of us who were freshmen living in the Corps, because we had our freshman duties and we were younger too, but.
Now, if I had looked at a, at the cross-section of the student body, I would have seen then more than half of the student body in civilian clothing?
That's correct.
Because almost none of these veterans were in the Corps, were they?
That's right, yeah.
There was one unit of veterans who wanted to go ahead and get a military commission, and I think only one unit.
There may have been two, but they represented, meaning one floor, one dormitory, 12 dormitories.
And there may have been a few veterans, the band or something, but the veterans were, most of them were civilian students.
Now, if a man had been an officer, he could not be a cadet.
Oh, could not be.
Or if you had been a lieutenant or above, you could not be a cadet.
If you had been an enlisted man, you could then take officer training if you wanted to, you know.
All right, sophomore year on, you live at home, so you walk to and from the campus.
And bicycle.
Okay, bicycle.
And when you weren't in class, what was your routine then?
Where did you spend that extra time?
Well, actually, as a pre-med student, you were in class most of the time.
Because your laboratories, you were taking, as a sophomore, you were taking physics, chemistry.
I'd taken comparative anatomy and biology that summer.
But, you know, these represented a half day each.
And then, plus your lectures.
So you really were in class most of the time.
Now, I would go to the library some.
And I guess if we had a little time between classes, we might sit out on the portico of the porch of the old science hall or something.
Where'd you eat lunch?
Of course, as a freshman in the Duncan Hall, after that, there was a little hamburger stand, a wooden structure behind the exchange store.
And that apparently dated back to the 1920s.
And it was still operational in the 1940s.
And you could get a hamburger or a sandwich or something there.
And I guess that's where I'd usually, if I were on campus, you know, at 11 o'clock class, finished at 12 and then was going back at 1.
Let's see.
And you?
There was also something called Casey's in the bottom of the YMCA, in one of the semicircular sides, basement level.
And I can remember that mainly as a child, because we'd go in and get a chocolate milk or something.
And I think it was still open when I was a freshman.
We could go there, too.
It closed as time went on.
In terms of make up the student body, using a currently politically correct word, diversity, what kind of diversity was there in the student body then?
Very little.
Were there some Jewish students?
Yes.
There was one pre-med I went through with.
He was Jewish.
Do you remember anybody ever giving that youngster anything negative by being Jewish?
No, I do not remember ever having that happen.
Hispanic?
Yes, some.
Not many, but some.
International students?
Some, but most of them were graduate level, and any of them always had graduate students from overseas, but not a lot of undergraduate students at that point.
We'll comment on the one Jewish student, Archie Leder, who could verbally handle himself very well, but I don't think he ever had any, in my presence, any, you know, unfortunate people who were negative toward him.
Many students then had a nickname, did you?
Of course my nickname was Rusty from on, and I was still called Rusty.
So you were Rusty?
Yeah.
Melvin Maltz told me that he was Jew boy, but he did not see it as a put down.
Do you remember any others that in today's circumstances somebody would say, oh, that was negative, but they would say, no, no, it wasn't intended to be negative?
Well, you know, I don't remember.
Once you put the uniform on, you pretty much were all the same.
You were included.
In my outfit, Herschel Maltz, speaking of Melvin, Herschel was in my outfit as a freshman.
And Herschel was not a shrinking violet at all and was well accepted.
And I'm assuming it would be, okay, so he's Jewish, so what?
You're Presbyterian, so what?
Now the student body at that time was, did anyone really even know whether this young man was a white collar or a blue collar, poor or well-to-do, did he?
No.
And yes, most Texans then lived in small towns.
We were in rural states, so I presume the student body reflected that.
And pre-med, but your major was what?
Biology.
And you went the full four years.
Correct.
Let's see.
And you didn't spend your year out at Bryan Field.
That comes later.
No, Brian Field, my first year, half the freshman cadets were here at the main campus and half were at Brian Field.
And one of the things that so skylighted it, but anyway pointed out the problems in the Cadet Corps was that 44 percent of the freshmen in upper class units on campus did not come back for the second semester.
Forty-four percent.
For the second semester, not the second year.
That was in 46?
That fall of 46, yeah.
Only about 6% or the amount of the freshmen at Bryan Field did not come back.
And so there was a lot of, actually there was a lot of turmoil.
And I might add some of the veterans who were not cadets necessarily were among those who, you know, wanted the system as it was and they were sort of,
I think influencing the cadet corps company commanders and battery commanders to be tougher and that sort of thing.
Anyway, there was a lot of turmoil, and that led to the investigation by the legislature that spring.
Now, when is that famous march on President Gilchrist's house?
You know, it was in the cooler part of the year.
Was it your 46, 47 year?
Yes.
And I can't remember if it was.
I think it was after Christmas in January of 47, I think.
It would have been sort of that time, and I know we were all, the Cadet Corps was formed in their units in the area where we're normally formed to march into the West Hall, and then we marched instead of the West Hall to the President's home.
And I was actually in a position, just by chance, my unit was in a position to see
whoever it was walk up to give interest.
He walked out of the front door on the porch of the old president's house.
And I presume they were resigning their commissions.
I mean, those of us who were freshmen, we didn't know what was happening.
I mean, this was just sort of a, we knew that it was a protest of some sort, but we didn't know the details of it.
Based on what you now know about that event, what did he do that was positive and what
Did he make any mistakes in his handling of it?
He was pretty firm, wasn't he?
Yes, very.
I know he told me once.
He was a person, a great planter and a great executor of plans.
A very fine administrator.
And if he had an Achilles heel, it was public relations.
And I might add, I think that's one reason the chancellor's position was set up, that he could do what he could do and somebody like Tom Harrington, who loved people, could meet the public.
But Gibb Yelchrist once told me, he said that one of the, I think, board people had told him, Gibb,
Rather than just cutting some reporter off short, just say, I have nothing to say, and then add, at this time.
Because that meant I might talk to you later.
But I still remember that.
But his public relations were not good.
And he was quite firm as dean of engineering.
If a student had done poorly and went in to complain to the dean, he could not expect a lot of sympathy.
And the grade would stand.
This march occurred at the President's house across the street from Sbisa Hall.
And so we have many hundreds of students out there milling around outside.
Let's see.
This was in front of the President's home, not Sbisa.
No, no.
Near Sbisa.
Yes.
And it was... We were more or less where the chapel is now, in the streets there.
And it was in the evening, wasn't it?
Yes, it was after dark.
All right.
Life on an all-male campus.
Where did a young undergraduate find a date?
Well, of course, if you grew up here, then you knew some of the girls in town.
And for the other youngsters, they would have dates come down from TFCW or Baylor or up from Navasota or places like that.
And, of course, there were student dances and that sort of thing and football games when people, dates would be there and so on.
Would the local high school age girls
at A&M Consolidated or Bryan High, did they date the campus?
Some did, yes.
Not all, but some did, yeah.
And quite often when the young ladies from out of town came to town, they stayed at faculty.
That's right.
Did your family ever have any?
I can remember my mother grew up in Navasota, so parents who mother knew if their daughter was coming up, they would often stay with us, yeah.
Would faculty families charge rent or was it just a favor?
I think it was just a favor, yeah.
I don't think rent was charged, yeah.
And I know at least once or twice a student would come to the door and say, Mrs. Anderson, I have my date coming, and would you please let her stay?
And I know there was a watercolor painting in our home that one of the, I guess, architecture students had given the mother after she had said yes, you know, to that.
Let's see, they came normally by the train?
Yes.
Of course, later, really after the war, there was a lot that came by train still, but there was also automobile transportation.
Right.
Now, was it during that era that
a whole trainload of TSCW students would come down on a certain weekend?
I guess so.
I didn't date any of the TSCW students, so I don't, but yes, I think so.
What would have been the events that would have been particularly special date events?
The ring dance was the big dance, yeah.
Okay.
And the cotton ball?
Cotton ball was another.
My big experience with the cotton ball was as about a six-year-old, Helen Mackey and I were the two little ones.
I don't know if we carried the rings or the crowns or what, but it was a photo.
We used to continue to get a Christmas card from
The Stefan daughter of a seal, sale, she was the queen or a duchess or something.
But I think because of that, for many years we got a Christmas card from that.
Right.
If you didn't have a car, how did you get to Bryan?
Well, living here, I had something like that available to me.
Now, I don't really know how everybody else got there.
I guess there was a bus.
I don't know.
Because they didn't hitchhike much to Bryan.
I presume it was longer distance.
I imagine you, I'm sure there was a bus, I'm sure.
But, oh, many years ago before, I remember before I was born, there was an interurban trolley sort of thing.
But that has gone.
It faded out by the 20s.
Is that right?
If you were going off campus for fun, respectable fun, where did students go?
Well, Franklin's was sort of a dance nightclub sort of place.
Where was it?
It was more or less where the West Bypass crosses University Drive out in the west.
Near where the airport is.
Near where the airport is?
Yes, on the north side of the road.
Franklin.
Was that a, would we today call it a dance hall?
Well, it was not called a dance hall.
It was sort of, it might have been called a club.
I don't know.
It had interior areas for dining and a bar.
And it had sort of a semicircular dance area outside too.
Was there any place where there was a band every weekend?
Alive music?
Gosh, Haskell, I don't remember on a weekly basis.
I've never heard of it.
Now, the Grove area on campus, just west of the drill field, had movies and dances and that sort of thing.
Yeah.
Outside sort of things.
Right.
What off-campus places of questionable reputation were there where students went?
There really weren't many places, but there was a place called Hardlicker's, H-R-D-L-I-C-K-A.
Uncle Ed's.
Wasn't that also Uncle Ed's?
Yeah.
When we moved off campus, we moved to 501 Fairview.
And we were not on the direct route between the campus and Hard Liquors, but sometimes some of the kids who maybe had had a few extra beers deviated from the shortest course back home and wandered over to Fairview, and you could hear them singing or making a little noise.
But that was just a place you could get a few beers.
It wasn't too much on that.
It was over on the Welburn Road.
Yes.
And it wasn't a, he didn't run a bootleg opera.
He didn't, it was just beer.
That's right, yeah.
Was Whiskey Bridge yet
a reality going to Burleson County to buy something just across the river?
Yes, that was a reality in the 1930s.
Because I think there may have been more than one store over there, sort of one went broke and another one succeeded it.
So I mean they date back at least to the 1930s.
Was there a bootlegger that anybody knew of here in
Not an official one.
I think I told you a story about my dad making some beer once.
Yes, yes.
But there may have been somebody who was trying to make a dollar out of it.
But I think otherwise people just occasionally brood something at home, maybe on campus.
All right, let me refer briefly to an anecdote about my Missouri experience.
I learned after I got up there that the fellow who wrote, I wonder what's going on behind the green door, that famous song, had attended the University of Missouri.
and there was a place at a certain location downtown up a flight of steps and there was a green door.
Yeah.
And there was a lot that went on behind the green door.
Yeah, yeah.
Now, was there any house of ill repute in Brazos County that... Not that I know of.
Now, there may have been something in North Bryan or someplace.
I don't know, but... Let's see.
Okay.
See, students drank beer.
Did they drink much of anything else?
Not much, no.
Okay.
I'm sure that somebody would have a whiskey or a highball or a mixed drink, but I think beer was the main item, yeah.
And beer.
the only one wherever I went on first-year occasions.
And they would have to hide it if they had it in their room.
All right.
Tobacco, how common was smoking among young men then?
Well, I don't remember a lot of people smoking, frankly.
I just don't remember people smoking.
I didn't smoke, so, you know, I just didn't notice it.
And in almost every case, it was cigarettes, not cigars.
Did students smoke pipes?
I don't remember, and I think one of my 1950 or so annual, it showed, is it?
a fellow named Lindley, who was a little older veteran with a pipe in his hand, or if not his mouth.
He was, I think, the co-editor of the Aggieland, or editor of the battalion one of the two.
But, I mean, I remember that picture because it was sort of unusual, you know, to see a student with a pipe.
Did students chew tobacco, dip snuff?
Some chewed tobacco, but not, you know, some of the guys from the agricultural areas, but not much.
What did you and your friends know about what we would today call drugs?
Well, I knew zero.
Did you even know the terminology?
Did you know what a heroin or marijuana was?
I didn't know the word.
Well, I don't know that I did either, really, when I think of it.
But it just didn't exist as far as I was concerned.
And I'm sure that I would have had some idea of it happening if it had been used.
Let's see, court trips.
Did you make some court trips?
A few, yes.
Well, the story of the first court trip when I was a freshman was the TCU game.
And so, of course, all the guys in the outfit were supposed to go, and so I mentioned that to Dad.
He said, no, you'll stay here and study.
This is a former coach.
This is a coach.
Yes, yes, yes.
But yeah, I went to some court trips.
I can remember marching up Congress Avenue in Austin and that sort of thing.
You know, we marched up from more or less the river to the capital, which is, I might add, an incline upward, too.
In general, what was the reaction on all the court trips of the people standing on the curbs watching?
Well, I think it was positive.
They were interested, yeah.
That's what I assumed it would be.
You know, we weren't just being, there wasn't a standing ovation or anything of that sort.
But I mean, yeah, people were interested in it.
Now, how did you get?
Particularly when the band would go by.
How did you get to those places?
Well, actually, you were just told to be somewhere at a certain time, and you arranged your own transportation.
And usually somebody would, you know, not many people really had cars, but for those occasions somebody would have a car.
It may have come from somebody's parents' home or something, and then everybody would pile in and go, you know.
And you'd spend the Friday night there.
Well, actually, yes you could, or you could, you know, you might just drive over early in the morning.
I was thinking, yeah, Austin or Houston.
Austin and Baylor, they were close by.
Fort Worth was a little different, of course.
All right.
Football game day, you told me that you and a friend learned to beat the system by working so that you didn't have all of that quite the same routine.
We didn't get as much voice training.
Yeah.
All right.
As a junior and senior, were you in the Corps or did you?
No.
I applied for a field artillery.
contract is not commission, but contract, which would lead to a commission.
And I actually didn't pass the physical examination.
And they were going to waver me with the artillery.
Didn't want anybody who was a pre-med who wasn't, you know, perfect physically.
And so I remember the young officer said to me, well, why don't you
try, since you're pre-med, not going to be a line officer, why don't you try the quartermaster?"
I thought, good gosh, my dad would throw me out if I weren't in something related to being a line officer.
So I went by the Irr-Murder cavalry office, since my uncle had been in the cavalry, to see if
That could be arranged and nobody was there.
And I decided, well, heck, I just won't be anything, you know.
So I was not a cadet the last two years.
And your dad didn't object?
No.